godzilla minus one (japanese: ゴジラ-1.0（マイナスワン）, hepburn: gojira mainasu wan) is a 2023 japanese epic kaiju film directed, written, and with visual effects by takashi yamazaki. produced by toho studios and robot communications and distributed by toho, it is the 37th film in the godzilla franchise, toho's 33rd godzilla film, and the fifth film in the franchise's reiwa era. the film stars ryunosuke kamiki, minami hamabe, yuki yamada, munetaka aoki, hidetaka yoshioka, sakura ando, and kuranosuke sasaki. in the film, postwar japan deals with the emergence of godzilla.
after the release of his film the great war of archimedes (2019), yamazaki was appointed to make a godzilla film. he subsequently wrote the script over three years, taking influence from godzilla (1954), jaws (1975), the films of hayao miyazaki, and godzilla, mothra and king ghidorah (2001). yamazaki had previously depicted godzilla in always: sunset on third street 2 (2007) and a 2021 amusement-park ride at seibu-en. in february 2022, robot publicized that yamazaki was soon to begin directing a kaiju film via a casting call on their website. filming occurred primarily in kantō and chūbu from march to june 2022. shirogumi handled the visual effects at their studio in chōfu from april 2022 to may 2023.
the film premiered at the shinjuku toho building on october 18, 2023, and was the closing film at the 36th tokyo international film festival on november 1. toho distributed it theatrically in japan on november 3, the same date as the first godzilla film's release in 1954, to celebrate the franchise's 70th anniversary. toho's subsidiary toho international later released it in north america on december 1. the film has grossed $72 million worldwide against an under $15 million budget and received critical acclaim. western critics praised its visual effects, direction, story, characters, musical score, and social commentary, and compared it favorably to recent hollywood films. it has been nominated for numerous awards in japan and the united states, including four at the 48th hochi film awards (with yamazaki winning best director), and six at the 78th mainichi film awards; it won best visual effects at the chicago film critics association awards, florida film critics circle awards, and san diego film critics society awards and is also on the shortlist for best visual effects at the 96th academy awards. a black-and-white version of the film, godzilla minus one/minus color, will be released in japan on january 12, 2024.


== plot ==
in 1945, near the end of world war ii, kamikaze pilot kōichi shikishima lands on a japanese base on odo island. lead mechanic tachibana deduces that shikishima had fled from his duty by feigning technical issues. that night, godzilla, a dinosaur-like creature, attacks. shikishima cannot bring himself to shoot the monster from his plane and is knocked unconscious. tachibana, the only other survivor of the attack, blames shikishima for failing to act.
shikishima returns home to find his parents dead in the bombing of tokyo. plagued by survivor's guilt, he works as a minesweeper and begins supporting a woman, noriko ōishi, whose parents also died in the bombing, and an orphaned baby, akiko, whom noriko rescued. meanwhile, godzilla is mutated and empowered by the united states' nuclear tests at bikini atoll; it destroys several american warships before heading for japan. owing to tensions with the soviet union, the u.s. offers no help save for a few decommissioned imperial japanese navy vessels approved by general douglas macarthur. the japanese government, concerned about inducing panic, does not notify the public about the danger.
in may 1947, shikishima and his minesweeper crew are tasked with stalling godzilla's approach to japan. they release a mine into godzilla's mouth and detonate it, causing significant damage, but it quickly regenerates. the heavy cruiser takao then engages godzilla, but is subsequently destroyed when godzilla unleashes its heat ray. after returning to tokyo, shikishima opens up to noriko about his encounters with godzilla. days later, godzilla makes landfall in japan and attacks ginza, where noriko works. noriko narrowly survives the initial attack and reunites with shikishima. enraged by tank fire, godzilla obliterates much of the district with its heat ray, killing tens of thousands. noriko is caught in the blast and presumed dead. devastated by the loss, shikishima vows revenge.
frustrated by the government's inaction, one of the minesweeper's crew, former naval engineer kenji noda, devises a plan to destroy godzilla by luring it out to sagami bay before surrounding it with freon tanks and rupturing them, lowering the water's buoyancy and sinking it, letting the resultant water pressure crush it. should the plan fail, balloons will be inflated under godzilla to force it back up, killing it through explosive decompression. to enact his plan, noda has recruited navy veterans to crew disarmed ijn destroyers. shikishima recruits tachibana to repair a broken-down kyushu j7w shinden fighter. he plans to kill godzilla in a suicide attack by flying into its mouth and detonate the explosive charges on board. he leaves akiko in the care of his neighbor sumiko.
godzilla resurfaces, and shikishima lures it into the trap set by two destroyers. it survives the initial plunge and then breaks free before being forced back up. with the help of a fleet of tugboats, the ships haul godzilla to the surface. an enraged godzilla prepares to destroy all the vessels with its heat ray, but shikishima crashes the plane into its mouth and destroys its head, causing the energy of the heat ray to tear its body apart. the crew celebrates as shikishima ejects before the explosion and parachutes to safety, having remembered that tachibana implored him to let go of his guilt and choose to live.
shikishima visits a hospital where he reunites with noriko, who survived the destruction but has a black bruise creeping up her neck. meanwhile, a chunk of godzilla's flesh begins to regenerate as it sinks into the ocean.


== cast ==


== production ==


=== development ===
after the release of toho's 2016 reboot shin godzilla, co-director shinji higuchi stated at the american fan convention g-fest that toho would not be able to produce another godzilla film until after 2020; this was due to their contract with legendary pictures, who were producing their own godzilla films, that forbade toho from releasing their potential godzilla films in the same year as legendary's films. in 2018, toho executive keiji ota revealed that shin godzilla would not receive a sequel and expressed interest in a potential shared universe godzilla series akin to the marvel cinematic universe.

in 2019, toho began a "godzilla room" division, devoted to planning new godzilla projects. following the release of his film the great war of archimedes that same year, filmmaker takashi yamazaki was appointed to make a godzilla film. he began preparing the project and initially spent one year developing the script. however, the covid-19 pandemic forced the crew to postpone filming for a few years, leading to the script being rewritten several times over the course of three years. during this time, producer minami ichikawa offered ryunosuke kamiki and minami hamabe the leading roles as a married couple in the film prior to them playing similar roles in the nhk drama series ranman (2023).godzilla minus one is yamazaki's third time working on a production utilizing godzilla. his first is always: sunset on third street 2 (2007) which features the monster in a dream-like opening. during preproduction on minus one, he also directed and created the effects for seibu-en amusement park's motion simulator attraction godzilla the ride: giant monsters ultimate battle (2021).on february 18, 2022, robot communications announced the film, with the working title blockbuster monster movie (超大作怪獣映画, chōtaisaku kaijū eiga), via a casting call on their official website. robot stated yamazaki would direct and that the film would be presented by toho. the next day, huffpost writer kenji ando mentioned the conjecture from fans on social media whether the film would be a remake of the 1954 film. ando also noted that it is a period piece set in postwar japan between 1945 and 1947, citing yamazaki's comments from an interview regarding his depiction of godzilla in always: sunset on third street 2: "you can't have godzilla unless it's the shōwa era."toho declared that yamazaki's unnamed kaiju project is a godzilla film on november 3, 2022, at an event celebrating the franchise's 68th anniversary known as "godzilla day". the company also revealed that the film had completed filming and had entered post-production with a targeted release date of november 3, 2023. yamazaki was named the film's writer and visual effects supervisor. during a press conference on december 13, 2022, toho's head of planning hisashi usui implied that the new film is connected to the 1954 film.


=== writing ===
yamazaki said that the worldwide anxiety and government unreliability during the pandemic was one of his major inspirations for the story and that he hopes these events are reflected clearly in the finished film. he steered clear of setting the film in modern japan and having to draw inspiration from the 2011 fukushima nuclear disaster as he believed it would become too similar to shin godzilla (2016). instead, yamazaki decided to set the film in postwar japan, allowing godzilla minus one to explore the themes of anti-war, trauma, hope, guilt, and redemption. he also stated that godzilla symbolizes the japanese perspective of nuclear holocaust during the time period, akin to the original 1954 godzilla film.yamazaki was heavily influenced by shusuke kaneko's godzilla, mothra and king ghidorah: giant monsters all-out attack (2001) —which he has cited as his favorite godzilla film— while writing the screenplay for godzilla minus one. at its screening, he reflected in a discussion with kaneko: "i had forgotten the contents of gmk for a while, but it seems like i self-consciously thought about it when writing the scenario for -1.0. without realizing it, i was under considerable influence". he also stated that godzilla minus one was also inspired by the 1954 film, steven spielberg's jaws (1975), and the films of hayao miyazaki. godzilla (2014) director gareth edwards identified spielberg's films close encounters of the third kind (1977) and jurassic park (1993), and christopher nolan's dunkirk (2017) as other evident influences on the film.a novelization of the film written by yamazaki was published in japan by shueisha on november 8, 2023.


=== design ===
the design of godzilla in minus one is a variation of the one in godzilla the ride. inspired by the godzilla, mothra and king ghidorah: giant monsters all-out attack design, yamazaki initially envisioned his design having "half-moon shaped eyes", but modeling head kosuke taguchi gave it "almond-shaped" ones instead, with the final design having "golden, almond-shaped eyes".yamazaki attempted to make this godzilla the most horrifying version yet. the crew designed godzilla to be ferocious, violent, and dynamic, with a static, god-like aspect. its dorsal fins were made more "spiky and ferocious" than the incarnation in godzilla the ride, as if its regenerative energy had become disorderly. yamazaki stated that the team also tried to make godzilla the "deadliest in history" adding that it is "discerning today, experiencing the freshness and fear felt by audiences at the time".


=== filming ===
principal photography took place on location in the kantō and chūbu (in the aichi and nagano prefectures) regions of honshu, starting on march 17, 2022, and wrapping circa june 11. according to robot's website, the film would be set between 1945 and 1947, so there would be restrictions on the extras' costume sizes, hairstyles (declaring that long-haired men must have perms), and hair colors (declaring that hair dyeing would not be allowed). the film's maritime sequences were filmed at lake hamana and in the enshū sea. between april and june 2022, several community businesses near the tenryū river helped the crew modify and maintain boats to shoot navy scenes in enshū. another shooting location was okaya, nagano.
during production, scenes featuring the kyushu j7w shinden were partly realized through the construction of a 1:1 scale replica of the aircraft, of which only a single example exists and is located outside japan in the collection of the national air and space museum in washington, d.c.. following the completion of shooting, the replica was transported to and put on display at the tachiarai peace memorial museum in chikuzen, fukuoka in july 2022. toho donated the replica under anonymity, only revealing their involvement in the construction of the model after minus one released.the film had a budget under 10% of that held by previous godzilla film, godzilla vs. kong (2021), produced by the american film company legendary. multiple sources —including variety, ign, the bbc, and the times— reported that the film's budget was $15 million, (roughly ¥2.2 billion), however, yamazaki indicated at the 2023 tokyo comic con that the budget was in fact less than that, saying "i wish it were that much". beforehand, yamazaki also denied that the budget was ¥1 billion, claiming that the movie cost much more.


=== visual effects ===
visual effects were handled by shirogumi at its studio in chōfu, under the supervision of yamazaki and direction of kiyoko shibuya. the team began creating the effects for godzilla minus one around april 2022, per the tv shinshu special about yamazaki that was released the following year. shirogumi revealed by opening a recruitment call for visual effects designers and compositors in august 2022, that post-production had begun and visual effects were taking place from that same month until january 2023; they later changed the dates to between november 2022 and february 2023. their website named the 3d animation software houdini and maya for design and nuke for compositing. post-production concluded in late may 2023, after the visual effects were finished.during an interview alongside shinji higuchi (co-director of shin godzilla), yamazaki noted that godzilla's scenes of destruction in minus one were inspired by higuchi's effects from gamera 3: revenge of iris, directed by shusuke kaneko.


=== music ===

yamazaki's frequent collaborator naoki satō scored the film. rambling records released godzilla minus one original soundtrack, on cd in japan on october 28, 2023, with a limited edition vinyl following on november 24. stock tracks composed by akira ifukube for godzilla (1954), king kong vs. godzilla (1962) and mothra vs. godzilla (1964) were used for some scenes.


== marketing ==
on june 12, 2023, the film's twitter account began a daily countdown for all of toho's live-action godzilla films, starting with its previous live-action film shin godzilla. on july 11, toho lifted the embargo on its secret kaiju film project, which was revealed as godzilla minus one. the film was announced with a teaser trailer, poster (which was primarily designed by yamazaki), and the release dates for the united states. merchandise for the film was unveiled the next day with a full-body shot of godzilla.on july 13, tamashii unveiled its godzilla toy for its s.h. monsterarts line; the toy was sculpted by yuki sakai under yamazaki's supervision and based on 3d data from the film. a series of pre-release products and an exhibit promoting the film was at the exhibition "the visual world-crafting of yamazaki takashi  [sic], film director" in yamazaki's hometown of matsumoto in nagano prefecture, from july 15 to october 29. a 2-meter tall godzilla statue was exhibited at the 2023 summer wonder festival on july 30. at the request of toho, hiroaki fukushi spent roughly one month creating a statue of godzilla, dubbed "godzilla neputa", to promote the film at the aomori nebuta matsuri from august 4 to 8.two days after releasing a new teaser, toho released its official trailer alongside the theatrical release poster, central cast and staff members on september 4. on september 14, 15 shots and a visual of godzilla from the film were released; ticket sales (via mubichike online) and flyers for its november 3 release were released the following day. on september 14, scifi japan reported that the film had remained the top trending film on social media sites in japan and the united states, with the trailer accumulating over 9 million views on youtube.during a press conference on september 25, hamamatsu, the city bordering lake hamana (where some scenes in the film were shot), announced that it would promote the film to make the location a tourist attraction by preparing for "location cruising" at the lake in late october. on october 7, behind-the-scenes footage of the making of godzilla minus one was broadcast on channel 4 of tv shinshu, as part of a television special on yamazaki, which was narrated by hidetaka yoshioka. toho declared on october 16 that godzilla minus one would be the first japanese movie screened in the 270-degree panoramic film format screenx.on october 18, yamazaki and the film's stars attended its red carpet premiere along godzilla street in kabukichō, shinjuku; the red carpet was 50.1 meters in length, which is the fictitious height of godzilla in godzilla minus one. television stations across japan began airing a television special on godzilla minus one in late october. it features interviews with yamazaki, kamiki, and hamabe, and behind-the-scenes footage. on october 23, yamazaki, kamiki, and hamabe attended the red carpet at the opening of the 36th tokyo international film festival. to promote the film in japan, soft drink manufacture cheerio released a new chūhai drink called the "godzilla energy chu-hi [sic]" on november 6.


=== selected screenings ===
on august 24, it was announced that, as a prelude to the release of godzilla minus one, yamazaki had selected "4 godzilla works" for screenings in september and october. an accompanying "talk show" took place before each screening, with shin godzilla and shin ultraman (2022) director shinji higuchi serving as the guest for the screening of the original 1954 godzilla film, and suitmaker keizō murase serving as the guest for the screening of ghidorah, the three-headed monster (1964). the third and fourth godzilla films selected by yamazaki for screenings are shusuke kaneko's godzilla, mothra and king ghidorah: giant monsters all-out attack (2001), and a new black-and-white version of shin godzilla created by hideaki anno, higuchi and katsuro onoue, respectively. kaneko and anno were also the guests at the talk shows for their respective films.


=== collaborative projects ===
the film was promoted at the tokyo dome in collaboration with the yomiuri giants in their match against the tokyo yakult swallows, taking place on october 1. a "special collaboration" video and a 3.6-meter statue of godzilla were displayed at the venue. on september 27, fujita kanko stated in a press release that the hakone kowakien yunessun hot spring theme park in hakone, kanagawa prefecture would hold an event in collaboration with the film from october 20, 2023, to january 8, 2024.


== release ==
the red carpet premiere was on october 18, 2023, at the theater of toho cinemas inside the shinjuku toho building in shinjuku, tokyo. first responses praised the film as a "masterpiece". it was the closing film at the 36th tokyo international film festival on november 1, 2023, where it was shown with english subtitles. the film was released nationwide in japan on november 3, to celebrate the franchise's 70th anniversary. the film was released in 500 theaters nationwide —including in imax, dolby cinema, 4dx, mx4d, and screenx formats— making it one of toho's largest domestic distributions to date. an english subtitled version was released in selected japanese theaters on november 23.the american red carpet premiere and screening was at the directors guild of america theater complex in los angeles on november 10, 2023, with yamazaki and kamiki in attendance. it was also screened by polygon at santa ana's frida cinema on november 27, the japan society in manhattan on november 28, and in selected large screens throughout the u.s. the next day. toho's american subsidiary toho international released the film in over 1,000 theaters throughout north america on december 1, with english subtitles. since december 15, the film has been extended to more than 2,600 american theaters.the film was released in other western countries on december 1. these countries included australia and new zealand (via local distributor sugoi co); austria, germany, liechtenstein, luxembourg, and switzerland (via peppermint anime); and benelux, france, italy, the nordics, poland, and spain. the new zealand premiere was on november 22, in queen street, auckland. anime limited released godzilla minus one in the united kingdom and ireland on december 15.


=== black-and-white version ===
toho will release a black-and-white version of the film, titled godzilla minus one/minus color (ゴジラ-1.0（マイナスワン）／c（マイナスカラー）, gojira mainasu wan/mainasu karā), in japanese theaters on january 12, 2024. in regards to this new version, yamazaki said in a statement: "rather than just making it monochrome, it is a cut-by-cut. i had them make adjustments while making full use of various mattes as if they were creating a new movie." minus color is apparently an attempt to make it more of a documentary-style horror film, and faithful reimagining of the 1954 film.


== reception ==


=== box office ===
godzilla minus one debuted at number one at the japanese box office, grossing ¥1.04 billion ($7.8 million) from 648,577 tickets during its first three days. during its opening weekend, the film grossed us$1.2 million from 49 imax theaters, making it the largest opening for a live-action japanese film in the format. the film remained at number one for three consecutive weekends and was overtaken by tonde saitama ~biwako yori ai o komete~ in its fourth weekend. the film has grossed ¥4.4 billion from 2.87 million tickets as of december 17, 2023.in the united states and canada, the film was released alongside animal, renaissance: a film by beyoncé, silent night, and the shift, and was projected to gross $11–12 million from 2,308 theaters in its opening weekend. the film made $4.7 million on its first day, including $2.1 million from its wednesday and thursday previews. it went on to debut to $11 million, finishing in third and breaking the united states opening weekend record for a live-action japanese film. in north america, it has also become the biggest debut for foreign film in 2023, surpassing demon slayer: kimetsu no yaiba – to the swordsmith village's opening, and the most successful live-action japanese movie in history. as of december 17, godzilla minus one is the sixth-highest-grossing japanese film of all time in the united states. meanwhile, in the united kingdom, the film debuted with a gross of £816,891.per box office mojo and the numbers, godzilla minus one has grossed $38,567,817 in the united states and canada; $31,131,383 in japan; $767,143 in australia; $204,195 in germany; $225,061 in the netherlands; $154,198 in italy; $140,423 in new zealand; $77,656 in norway; $68,240 in spain; and $1,035,467 in the united kingdom. thus, the film has grossed approximately $72,371,583 worldwide.


=== critical response ===
godzilla minus one has received universal critical acclaim. according to the hollywood reporter, american film critics have concertedly complimented the film because of yamazaki's impressive tiny-budgeted visuals, its touching human drama, and the usage of the kaiju metaphor for social commentary. on the review aggregator website rotten tomatoes, 98% of 146 critics' reviews are positive, with an average rating of 8.4/10. the website's consensus reads: "with engaging human stories anchoring the action, godzilla minus one is one kaiju movie that remains truly compelling between the scenes of mass destruction." metacritic, which uses a weighted average, assigned the film a score of 80 out of 100, based on 32 critics, indicating "generally favorable" reviews. american audiences surveyed by cinemascore gave the film an average grade of "a" on an a+ to f scale, and polls by posttrak gave it a 92% overall positive score, with 83% saying they would definitely recommend the film.screen international critic tim grierson felt "there’s a reverence shown to godzilla minus one’s gruesome colossus; audiences may cheer the havoc it wreaks, but yamazaki understands godzilla’s sombre societal implications." but why tho's sarah musnicky gave the film 9 out of 10 stars, saying it "will win the hearts of fans everywhere. not just for godzilla, but for the human characters within that reminds us why it is important to infuse soul into a kaiju or monster film." time out's reviewer gave the film 4 out of 5 stars, calling it "heartfelt and often awe-inspiring" and godzilla "one scary bastard".katie rife, reviewing the film for ign, gave the film 8 out of 10 stars, saying it is more "hopeful" than shin godzilla with "more swell, in the score and on the heart strings; less terror and more pride, even (or perhaps especially) while evoking a vulnerable period in japan's history". variety's reviewer said the film's "emotionally engaging storyline" and "heat-ray-breathing action", makes it a "high point in the long-running series". collider rated the film "b+", expressing that the film "balances sweeping spectacle and tense action with the more complicated themes of war and loss, making it a solid monster movie that hardly ever makes a wrong step." james berardinelli acclaimed the film's effects, spectacle, screenplay, set and sound design, cinematography, and character development; dubbing it "an excellent godzilla movie – arguably among the best ever to grace the screen".in a more mixed review by matt schley of the japan times believing the film "evokes the original film more than any godzilla film since the ’50s", he states its period piece setting "avoids taking on contemporary issues, more content to be an entertaining ride than use japan’s most malleable monster as a metaphor for what ails us".


==== other responses ====
hideaki anno, co-director of shin godzilla, called the film "well-made" and praised the film's technical prowess, saying that japan has improved in the field of visual effects. godzilla (2014) director gareth edwards admitted to feeling "jealous", adding that "this is what a godzilla movie should be" and that the film should be "mentioned as a candidate for the best godzilla movie of all time". at the film's american premiere, godzilla: king of the monsters (2019) director michael dougherty told yamazaki and kamiki that the film was "amazing". seth green said "it's a movie filled with a lot of emotions, and i was very moved by it." guillermo del toro noted the film's "theatre-sized ambition and fulfillment" and called it "a miracle".video game designer hideo kojima hailed the film, saying that "godzilla, the plot, the vfx, ifukube's music, ms. hamabe's appearance, and the applause afterward" were "nothing but pluses", joking that "the result was +120 points, so i would like to change the title". one piece creator eiichiro oda said that the film was "great" and it inspired him to watch other entries in the series afterward. manga artist aka akasaka called the human drama "wonderful" and admitted that he cried during some scenes. television producer nobuyuki sakuma said that it was "both old and new" and "the power of godzilla gave me goosebumps many times". yoshifumi naoi, the bassist of alternative rock band bump of chicken, called it a "truly terrific movie", adding: "in many ways, my body is numb even after watching it". comedian shohei osada watched the film three times, declaring it "too interesting".


=== u.s. performance ===
several american media analysts and journalists have noted how the film's critical and commercial success in the united states has outdone recent hollywood tentpoles, particularly superhero films; and how the film delivered quality visual effects on a budget below $15 million, a low figure compared to hollywood films. comscore's senior analyst paul dergarabedian attributed the film's success to "outside-of-the-box thinking or movies that have a unique point of view, or not trying to just replicate what was successful before". he compared the film to similarly successful 2023 films —such as oppenheimer and barbie— that also offered fresh and unorthodox experiences. dergarabedian argued that audiences do not have fatigue from godzilla or action films but fatigue from "bad movies". saba hamedy from nbc news said that the film proved that action films based on recycled characters can still find success.
sam williamson from collider attributed the film's box office success to its low budget. he noted that japan's labor laws incentivize studios to keep costs low at the expense of the cast and crew. japanese actor kanji furutachi stated that japan lacks unions for actors and filmmakers, which brings a "low-quality environment with long hours and low wages" and rise to exploitation.


=== accolades ===


== potential sequel ==
director takashi yamazaki reflected on the film's ending: "i think it's more cinematic if it doesn't end neatly and properly. it's not just so a sequel can be made, it's also so the characters are kept alive in the hearts of the audience." on the film's opening day, he expressed interest in directing another godzilla film, saying: "i wonder if you'll let me shoot one more picture?".when directly asked if he would rather make a sequel to godzilla minus one or an entirely different picture next, yamazaki conferred: "my honest feelings, i would like to see a continuation of those people's story. if i could make it, i would like to make a movie that involves what happens to them after that." in an issue of mono magazine, the director implied that a sequel to the film may explore the curse godzilla left behind on japan, similar to the one left behind by the tatari-gami in hayao miyazaki's princess mononoke (1997). additionally, minami hamabe indicated in the same publication that the film may be the start of an entirely new series of godzilla films, noting "if there is a next series, i might be the one stepping on and crushing people".


== notes ==


== references ==


=== bibliography ===
"december 16 issue". mono magazine. no. 928. world photo press. december 1, 2023. jan 4910287531233.
toho (november 30, 2023). 【各界からコメント到着】『ゴジラ-1.0』＜大ヒット上映中＞ [[comments arrived from various fields] "godzilla minus one" <blockbuster screening now>] (in japanese). toho movie channel. retrieved december 1, 2023 – via youtube.
tv shinshu (october 7, 2023). 映画監督 山崎貴の世界 [the world of film director takashi yamazaki] (television special) (in japanese). tv shinshu – via tver.


== external links ==
official website  (in japanese)
american website
united kingdom website
german website (in german)
godzilla minus one at toho (in japanese)
godzilla minus one at imdb 
godzilla minus one at allmovie