Javier Gerardo Milei (born 22 October 1970) is an Argentine politician, economist, and author who is the president-elect of Argentina. Before entering politics, Milei gained notability as an economist, as the author of multiple books on economics and politics, and for his distinct political philosophy as a vocal proponent of the Austrian School. He critiqued the fiscal policies of various Argentine administrations and advocates reduced government spending. 
As a university professor, Milei taught courses in macroeconomics, economic growth, microeconomics, and mathematics for economists. He also wrote numerous books and hosted radio programs. In 2021, Milei was elected to the Chamber of Deputies, representing the City of Buenos Aires for La Libertad Avanza. As a national deputy, he limited his legislative activities to voting, focusing instead on critiquing what he calls Argentina's political elite and its propensity for high government spending. Milei has pledged not to raise taxes and has donated his national deputy salary through a monthly raffle. He defeated economy minister Sergio Massa in the second round of the 2023 presidential election on a platform that held the ideological dominance of Peronism responsible for the ongoing Argentine economic crisis.Milei is known for his flamboyant personality, distinctive personal style, and strong media presence. He has been described politically as a right-wing libertarian, populist, and supporter of laissez-faire capitalism, aligning specifically with minarchist and anarcho-capitalist principles. His views distinguish him in the Argentine political landscape and have garnered significant public attention and polarizing reactions. He has proposed a comprehensive overhaul of the country's fiscal and structural policies. Milei supports freedom of choice on drug policy, guns, prostitution, same-sex marriage, sexual preference, and gender identity, while opposing abortion and euthanasia. In foreign policy, he advocates for closer relations with the United States, supporting Ukraine in response to Russia's invasion, and distancing Argentina from geopolitical entanglement with China.


== Early life and education ==
Javier Gerardo Milei was born on 22 October 1970 in Palermo, Buenos Aires. He grew up in the Villa Devoto neighborhood and later moved to Sáenz Peña. Milei's mother, Alicia, was a housewife, and his father, Norberto, was a bus driver. Milei has said that his parents beat and verbally abused him, which caused him to not speak to them for a decade; he was supported by his younger sister Karina and his maternal grandmother.Milei attended Catholic schools, including the secondary school Cardenal Copello. At school, he was nicknamed El Loco ("The Crazy One") for his outbursts and aggressive rhetoric. In his late teens and early adulthood, Milei sang in the cover band Everest, which mostly played Rolling Stones covers. He also played goalkeeper for the Chacarita Juniors association football team until 1989, when there was hyperinflation in Argentina and he committed to a career in economics.Milei studied introductory economics and the law of supply and demand, which he thought seemed to be at odds with the ongoing hyperinflation; he said he saw people throwing "themselves on top of the merchandise" in a supermarket and began to study economics in more detail to understand it. Milei obtained an economics degree from the private University of Belgrano (Licentiate) and two master's degrees from the Instituto de Desarrollo Económico y Social and the private Torcuato di Tella University.


== Economics career ==
For over 21 years, Milei has been a professor of macroeconomics, economics of growth, microeconomics, and mathematics for economists. He is a specialist in economic growth and has taught several economic subjects in Argentine universities and abroad. He has written more than 50 academic papers.Milei became the chief economist at Máxima AFJP, a private pension company; a head economist at Estudio Broda, a financial advising company; and a government consultant at the International Centre for Settlement of Investment Disputes. He was also a senior economist at HSBC Argentina. He served as chief economist at several national and international government public bodies. Since 2012, Milei has led the division of Economic Studies at Fundación Acordar, a national think tank. He is also a member of the B20 and a member of the Economic Policy Group of International Chamber of Commerce, an advisor to the G20. For 15 years, he worked at the private company Corporación América as the chief economist and financial adviser to Eduardo Eurnekian.Milei is the author of several books, including El camino del libertario. He has a notable presence on television, with a 2018 ranking by Ejes showing him as the most interviewed economist on television, at 235 interviews and 193,347 seconds. Milei also hosted his own radio show, Demoliendo mitos (Demolishing Myths), featuring regular appearances by Alberdian economist and businessman Gustavo Lazzari and personalities like Alberdian lawyer Pablo Torres Barthe and right-libertarian political scientist María Zaldívar.


== Early political career ==


=== Rise to prominence ===
During the 2010s, Milei achieved significant notoriety and public exposure in debates developed on Argentine television programs characterized by insults to his rivals, foul language, and aggressive rhetoric when expressing and debating his ideals and beliefs, such as with Buenos Aires chief of government Horacio Rodríguez Larreta. This led many commentators to label him antipolitical or disruptive. U.S. Senator Ted Cruz shared an interview between Viviana Canosa and Milei on Twitter, jokingly proposing to invite him to the 2024 Republican Party presidential debates.Before and during his political career, Milei has been entangled in various controversies. In February 2017, he generated controversy by naming Domingo Cavallo Argentina's best economy minister, a choice that remains contentious due to Cavallo's unfavorable image in the country. In November 2017, he caused a stir by declaring that "the main producer of Argentina's economists is a Marxist indoctrination center", in reference to the Faculty of Economic Sciences, University of Buenos Aires, leading to what he called "the ubiquitous proliferation of Keynesian brutes".On 26 June 2018, Milei called journalist Teresita Frías "a donkey" after she criticized his ideological views as totalitarian. As he refused to apologize, Milei was accused of exerting gender violence, and a local court mandated a psychological examination. Family and Gender judge Carmelo Paz forbade him from participating in public gatherings as a panelist or lecturer within the boundaries of the city of Metan, under the threat of legal action. In 2018, he made his acting debut in his play El consultorio de Milei, with Claudio Rico and Diego Sucalesca. In 2019, Noticias named him one of the most influential people in Argentina. In 2020, he spoke in favor of protests against the government led by Alberto Fernández.


=== Avanza Libertad and La Libertad Avanza ===
In 2020, Milei joined Avanza Libertad (Freedom Forward), which calls itself "a government alliance, which brings together, convenes, and addresses men and women of all social conditions, made up of different political parties, and created to promote liberal policies that contribute to the economic, political, cultural, and social takeoff that we Argentines need to return to being the thriving country that we were at the beginning of the year 1900." Avanza Libertad was criticized for including among its candidates neo-Nazis and apologists for the National Reorganization Process.Milei's 2021 election campaign to become a member of the Argentine Chamber of Deputies focused on Buenos Aires neighborhoods. He used a cheap campaign, with strolls in the neighborhoods and talks with random people. By May 2022, he was rising in the polls. His rhetoric was attractive to under-30 voters who were born during the 1998–2002 Argentine great depression and face the 2020s' economic stagnation. By March 2023, polls showed that 17% of Argentines would vote for him for president and that his political coalition would become the third parliamentary force in the Argentine Congress. His supporters include those who once voted for Kirchnerism but as of 2023 would vote for Milei as a protest even if they do not support his economic ideas.During his successful election campaign in July 2021, Milei pledged not to support any tax increases or new taxes. He established the coalition La Libertad Avanza (Freedom Moves Forward), which secured third place in the primary elections in Argentina with 13.66% of the vote. In the 2021 Argentine legislative election, with 17% of the vote, it confirmed the third place, and Milei's far-right coalition entered the Argentine Congress. They performed best in Cordoba and Santa Fe, the second and third most populous districts in the country; they also performed well in Peronist strongholds in North Tucuman, Salta, La Rioja, and San Juan, and in Santa Cruz in Patagonia, which is considered the cradle of Kirchnerism.Running under the slogan "I didn't come here to lead lambs but to awaken lions", Milei denounced what he saw as a political caste, which he said was composed of "useless, parasitic politicians who have never worked". He said phrases like "I'm here to kick these criminals out", and was particularly supported by the youth for his ways of communication, which included the promotion of his political views via TV, radio, and YouTube. In September 2021, Milei said: "The first thing I am going to say to the shitty, silly, parasitic and useless political caste is what I am not going to do. I will never go against private property, I will never go against freedom, I will never raise a tax, I will never create new taxes." Upon assuming office as deputy, Milei fulfilled one of his campaign promises by raffling his salary to a random person each month, aiming to "return money to the citizens". He described this monthly raffle, which is open to anyone, as a way to get rid of what he considers dirty money and said: "The state is a criminal organization that finances itself through taxes levied on people by force. We are returning the money that the political caste stole."


== National deputyship ==
As a national deputy, Milei had been present in the Chamber 52% of the time as of April 2023. As of October 2022, he did not propose laws and did not join any parliamentary commissions. This remained true by August 2023. One of his absences was particularly criticized by the Juntos por el Cambio opposition because it allowed the national government to raise taxes on plane tickets by a single vote. At the same time, his promised monthly raffle for the salary he receives as a national deputy gave away more than seven million pesos since his election to Parliament.In July 2023, Milei faced an investigation into alleged selling of candidacies within La Libertad Avanza. The businessman Juan Carlos Blumberg said that La Libertad Avanza "made politics a business", which prompted Milei to deny that there were paid candidates. Milei was also accused of having been funded and supported by Peronism. Juan Luis González said that Milei "allowed himself to be financed by provincial governments, received technical, logistical, and monetary aid from the Peronism that he claims to fight, threatened all those who wanted to open their mouths". Statements by the prosecutor Ramiro González did not provide concrete data about the allegations. While the investigation was still progressing as of July 2023, Milei dismissed it as a political operation to discredit him, and demanded that González be investigated, accusing him of damaging his image.


== 2023 presidential campaign ==

A member of the Libertarian Party, Milei ran for president of Argentina as part of La Libertad Avanza. His running mate is Victoria Villarruel. As inflation rose above 100% in May 2023, his position in the polls rose. During the campaign for the primary elections, Milei generated controversy by suggesting that he would allow the free sale of firearms and human organs. Furthermore, he intends to revoke the Voluntary Interruption of Pregnancy Bill that legalized abortion in Argentina, which was approved in 2020, and is against its decriminalization. In an August 2023 interview with Alejandro Fantino, he suggested holding a referendum to do so, saying: "Just because something is legal, it does not mean that it is legitimate. I am against it (the abortion law) because it is against the right to life. ... At least I would hold a referendum. And, if the result is in my favor, the law is eliminated. But let the Argentines choose. Let's see if the Argentines believe in the murder of a defenseless human in the womb of the mother." Gun laws in Argentina are restrictive. According to his party's electoral platform, Milei proposes the "deregulation of the legal market" for weapons and "the protection of its legitimate and responsible use by the citizens".Milei's rise has been described within the context of the last two presidencies. Analysts described a win for Milei as a more dramatic version of the pro-business government of former president Mauricio Macri, who tried to introduce market reforms after taking office in 2015, only to clash with the political opposition and plunge headlong into a financial crisis that ended with the country asking the International Monetary Fund for another rescue package. Fernández, Macri's successor, struggled to fix the economy amid the COVID-19 pandemic in Argentina and a severe shortage of foreign currency, leaving the country vulnerable to another debt default. Fernández is also an unpopular president and chose not to run for reelection. In August 2023, Milei said he would not end social programs, which support millions of people in a country where almost 40% of the population is impoverished; he called them "victims, not victimizers", adding that ending this type of social assistance would take up to 15 years.


=== Primary election ===
In the August primary election, which is seen as an indication of how citizens are likely to vote in the October general election, Milei emerged as the leading candidate, with 30% of the vote, ahead of the traditional Peronism–Kirchnerism and Macrism that dominated the country in the 2010s. Opinion polls predicted that economy minister Sergio Massa would secure the most votes as a candidate in the primaries, with Juntos por el Cambio expected to be the most supported coalition overall; Milei polled at about 20% and was seen as an outsider candidate. In June 2023, the markets welcomed Massa's presidential candidacy, as it polarized the election between the ruling party and Juntos por el Cambio, reducing what was called the "Milei factor". Javier Timerman, Managing Partner of Adcap Grupo Financiero, said on CCN Radio that "Javier Milei has always been a source of fear and uncertainty for foreign investors, both financial and investor in the real economy."Initially, for the first round of the general election, with the possibility of a runoff in November, Peronists saw Milei as a possible ally who would divide the votes of the centre-right coalition. During the night of celebration, Milei danced rock and roll with his family, choosing Bersuit Vergarabat's song "Se viene"; the song's chorus says: "The explosion is coming." Milei looks to Menem as an example and the band had forbidden him to use the song, but the hall of celebrations sang it anyway. He said: "This election will not only put an end to Kirchnerism, but also to the parasitic, larcenous, useless caste that is sinking the country." His win was celebrated by far-right figures including Jair Bolsonaro, José Antonio Kast, Ted Cruz, and Spanish political party Vox.


=== General election ===
The Argentine peso plunged and interest rates were raised in the aftermath of his primary election victory, while the official dollar exchange rate rose by 20%, and the Central Bank of Argentina raised interest rates. As a result of his strong performance in the primaries, Milei was considered the front-runner in the general election. Analysts said this could lead to higher inflationary and foreign exchange pressures. According to the Eurasia Group analyst and Latin American researcher Luciano Sigalov, if Milei won the presidency, he would face governability issues due to lacking a parliamentary majority to pass the radical pro-market reforms he advocates, as well as street protests from Peronist and social movements; Sigalov said, "The likely prospect of a Milei victory and the risks from his radical policy program will generate more pressures on inflation and exchange rates. The worsening economic conditions will benefit Milei as he blames [rival] politicians for the spiraling crisis."On 22 October, Milei advanced to the runoff, in which he faced Massa. Milei defeated Massa in the runoff on 19 November, when Massa conceded. Milei is to take office as president on 10 December.


== Political positions ==

Milei advocates for minimal government, focusing on justice and security, with a philosophy rooted in life, liberty, property, and free-market principles. He criticizes socialism and communism, advocating for economic liberalization and restructuring of government ministries. He opposes Argentina's Central Bank and current taxation policies.Economically, Milei is influenced by the Austrian School and admires former President Menem's policies. He supports capitalism, viewing socialism as embodying envy and coercion. Milei proposes reducing government ministries and addressing economic challenges through spending cuts and fiscal reforms, criticizing previous administrations for excessive spending. He has praised the economic policies of former British Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher and called her a "great leader".Socially conservative, Milei opposes abortion and euthanasia, is indifferent to same-sex marriage and supports privatization in education and healthcare. He opposes mandatory vaccination, and supports drug legalization and prostitution. Milei advocates for deregulation of firearm ownership and proposes immigration restrictions for criminals.In foreign policy, he criticizes the IMF, opposes trade unions, aligns with anti-socialist figures like Trump and Bolsonaro, and prioritizes alliances with the U.S. and Israel. He is cautious about relations with China, supports Ukraine against Russia, and advocates for dialogue about the Falklands War.


=== Argentine politics ===
Milei argues that "the only time that pure liberalism was applied was in 1860 and we were a prosperous country." He criticized the governments of Hipólito Yrigoyen, Juan Domingo Perón, Raúl Alfonsín, Cristina Fernández de Kirchner, and Alberto Fernández. Milei characterized 1930s Argentina as a fascist regime that led to Peronism and Perón's "three-legged fascism" rather than a return to liberal policies.Milei excluded the Juntos por el Cambio leader and former president Mauricio Macri from the political caste he denounced for what he regards as their collectivist policies but criticized Juntos por el Cambio member María Eugenia Vidal, who had said that "we share the same values", as governor of the Buenos Aires Province, for not keeping her campaign promises of lower taxes. Milei described Patricia Bullrich, the 2023 Juntos por el Cambio leader, as "part of the Argentine failure".In a debate before the 2021 primary elections, Frente de Todos candidate Leandro Santoro asked Milei whether he had ever worked for the public sector, since he advocates the state's abolition. Milei had criticized Santoro as "a state parasite" and said: "I understand that you are 45 years old and you have been involved in politics since you were 14. Have you ever worked in the private sector in your life?" Santoro affirmed that Milei was "an employee of the National Congress in 1994 and reported for the former genocidal general Antonio Domingo Bussi", who at the time was a national deputy. In response, Milei acknowledged having worked for Bussi through his Twitter account. In a September 2022 speech to Argentina's Chamber of Deputies, Milei criticized Macri for his proposal not to put a dollar into the Aerolíneas Argentinas, wondering why he did not do that while president, and questioned the government 2023 budget. He also referred to the attempted assassination of Fernández de Kirchner as "not a magnicide", claiming that the term implies that the "political caste" is above the people.


== Public image ==

Milei has cultivated a complex and controversial public image marked by a blend of populist, right-wing libertarian, and conservative ideologies. Known for his ultra-liberal economic views and right-wing populist rhetoric, Milei's political stance has been subject to various interpretations by international media and political commentators. His rise to prominence during the 2023 presidential campaign, fueled by his primary win, sparked widespread attention. Milei's proposals, including the abolition of the Central Bank of Argentina and the adoption of dollarization, have been both acclaimed and criticized. Despite criticism, his advocacy of economic liberalism, fiscal conservatism, and reduced government intervention has resonated with a segment of the Argentine electorate frustrated by traditional political structures. Milei's public image can be seen as encapsulating the polarizing nature of his political and economic ideologies within the context of contemporary Argentine politics.


== Personal life ==
Milei has been nicknamed el Peluca ("The Wig") due to his eccentric hairstyle. He has consistently said that he does not comb his hair, leading to significant press attention; only Lilia Lemoine, vice president of his party and a cosplayer, is able to style his hair.In May 2022, he said: "I will not be apologizing for having a penis. I don't have to feel ashamed of being a man, white, blond with light blue eyes."In 2018, Milei said that he was previously estranged from his parents and regarded them as dead. During his 2021 political campaign, he reconciled with his father and mother. He has always had a close bond with his younger sister, Karina Milei, who managed his election campaigns. Milei is not married, and said that if elected president, he would have his sister take the role of First Lady; previously, he dated the singer Daniela Mori. In August 2023, he announced that he is dating actress Fátima Flórez.In an October 2017 interview with La Nación, Milei said that he champions free love. On a local television program in June 2020, he disclosed his involvement in several threesomes and his role as a neotantra instructor, describing himself as a tantric sex instructor, claiming to be "capable of remaining three months without ejaculating". In August 2023, The Daily Telegraph called him a "rock singer and tantric sex instructor", while The Guardian called him a "former tantric sex coach". Milei has compared drug use to suicide. He said that he had smoked marijuana only once and said: "I remember laughing a lot."In July 2023, the journalist Juan Luis González released El Loco, an unauthorized biography of Milei, whom he interviewed several times. The book sought to define the New Right in Argentina, and González said he could not avoid discussing Milei, including his eccentric personal life, ranging from telepathy and esotericism to speaking with his dead dog to his "God-sent mission" to become Argentina's president. In the book's preface, González wrote: "With the passing of the months, the interviews, the off-the-record meetings, following invoices, stamps, and paperwork, the work went from being a field one with almost academic edges to a tragicomic thriller, halfway between Raymond Chandler's black noirs and John Kennedy Toole's A Confederacy of Dunces."Milei is a cosplayer and has a superhero persona called "General AnCap".


=== Religious views ===
Milei was a Catholic until November 2023, but has been critical of the Catholic Church under Pope Francis, whom on different occasions he called a "Jesuit who promotes communism", "an unpresentable and disastrous character", "a fucking communist", "communist turd", and a "piece of shit", accusing him of "preaching communism to the world" and being "the representative of the evil one on Earth" for promoting the option for the poor, a social justice Catholic doctrine of aid to the underprivileged. As a result, the highest authorities of the Argentine Episcopal Conference and other Catholics criticized him. La Libertad Avanza considers social justice theft because it relies on tax revenues. Milei has said: "Jesus didn't pay taxes." In response, about the then upcoming 2023 elections, Francis said: "The extreme right always reconstructs itself, it is the triumph of selfishness over communitarianism. ... I am terrified of saviours of the nation without a political party history."Milei cited Biblical passages to criticize the state, which he describes as "an invention of the evil one". To show what has been regarded as his rejection of the state, he has repeatedly posed the radical dilemma: "If I had to choose between the state and the mafia, I would choose the mafia. Because the mafia has codes, the mafia adapts, the mafia doesn't lie. And above all, the mafia competes."Prior to November 2023, Milei said he contemplated converting to Judaism but said that observing the Jewish Sabbath could pose challenges if he became president. In a 2018 Radio El Mundo interview, he expressed his belief in the existence of God. He reiterated this belief in 2022 to the journalist Luis Novaresio, who retorted: "How can a guy as pragmatic as you believe in something unverifiable?" Milei responded: "That is your case. Very strong things have happened to me, which exceed any scientific explanation." According to Milei, he has had conversations with God, whom he calls "the number 1", and God told him that he had the mission to enter politics and not stop until he became president. Milei also reads the Torah daily and has visited the grave of Orthodox rabbi Menachem Mendel Schneerson. Milei converted to Judaism in November 2023.


=== Dogs ===

Milei owns five English Mastiffs, with the progenitor being Conan, who died in 2017 after suffering from spinal cancer. He considers Conan his son and has named four of Conan's six clones, including one named after the original and another named Angelito, Milton (in honor of Milton Friedman), Murray (in honor of Murray Rothbard), Robert, and Lucas (both named after Robert Lucas). Milei said that he cloned Conan because he understands cloning as "a way of approaching eternity". To do this, he went to a clinic in the United States; the process cost him about $50,000. He has called his dogs his four-legged children and thanked them after his 2023 primary win.Milei said he had dialogues with the likes of Rothbard and Ayn Rand. In 2015, he cited Conan as a source of inspiration for his writing. Of Conan's death in 2017, Milei said that he had not really died (he called it "his physical disappearance" and continued to refer to Conan in the present tense) but gone to sit next to God to protect him, and that it was thanks to this that he had begun to have talks with God himself. According to González, Milei wrote to a friend in a chat: "I saw the resurrection of Christ three times, but I can't talk about it. They would say I'm crazy." According to various sources consulted by La Nación, Milei maintains that he and Conan have a mission assigned to them by God and that he met Conan, who was a lion, as a gladiator in the Roman Colosseum about 2,000 years ago.


== Electoral history ==


=== Executive ===


=== Legislative ===


== Radio ==


== Publications ==


=== Books ===
Milei, Javier (2014). Lecturas de Economía en tiempos de Kirchnerismo [Economic Readings in Times of Kirchnerism] (in Spanish). Grupo Unión. ISBN 978-987-3773-00-6.
— (2014). Política Económica Contrarreloj [Economic Politics Against the Clock] (in Spanish). Ediciones Barbarroja. ISBN 978-987-45133-2-8.
— (2015). El retorno al sendero de la decadencia Argentina [The Return to the Road of Argentine Decadence] (in Spanish). Grupo Unión. ISBN 978-987-3677-18-2.
—; Giacomini, Diego (2016). Maquinita, Infleta y Devaluta [Money Printer, Inflation and Devaluation] (in Spanish). Grupo Unión. ISBN 978-987-3677-44-1.
— (2017). Otra vez sopa: maquinita, infleta y devaluta: ensayos de economía monetaria para el caso argentino [Soup Again: Money Printer, Inflation, and Devaluation. Monetary Economy Essays for the Argentine Case] (in Spanish). Ediciones B, Grupo Zeta. ISBN 978-987-627-814-0.
— (2018). Desenmascarando la mentira Keynesiana. Keynes, Friedman y el triunfo de la Escuela Austriaca [Unmasking the Keynesian Lie: Keynes, Friedman, and the Triumph of the Austrian School] (in Spanish). Grupo Unión. ISBN 978-84-7209-727-8.
—; Giacomini, Diego (2019). Libertad, libertad, libertad [Liberty, Liberty, Liberty] (in Spanish). Galerna. ISBN 978-950-556-739-3.
— (2020). Pandenomics. La economía que viene en tiempos de megarrecesión, inflación y crisis global [Pandenomics: The Coming Economy in Times of Mega Recession, Inflation, and Global Crisis] (in Spanish). Galerna. ISBN 978-950-556-779-9.
— (2022). El camino del libertario [The Path of the Libertarian] (in Spanish). Planeta Argentina. ISBN 978-950-49-7456-7.
— (2023). El fin de la inflación. Eliminar el Banco Central, terminar con la estafa del impuesto inflacionario y volver a ser un país en serio [The End of Inflation: Eliminate the Central Bank, End the Inflation Tax Scam, and Return to Being a Serious Country] (in Spanish). Planeta Argentina. ISBN 978-950-498-171-8.


=== Journal articles ===
Milei, Javier (January 2004). "Real Exchange Rate Targeting. ¿Trilema monetario o control de capitales? La política fiscal" [Real Exchange Rate Targeting: Monetary Trilemma or Capital Control? Tax Policy]. Revista de Economía y Estadística (in Spanish). National University of Córdoba, Faculty of Economic Sciences, Institute of Economics and Finance. 42 (2): 63–87. doi:10.55444/2451.7321.2004.v42.n2.3807. S2CID 154116264.
— (2014). "De los picapiedras a los supersónicos. Maravillas del progreso tecnológico con convergencia" [From the Flintstones to the Jetsons: Wonders of Technological Progress with Convergence]. Revista Actualidad Económica (in Spanish). National University of Córdoba, Faculty of Economic Sciences, Institute of Economics and Finance (83): 5–18.
—; with Diego Giacomini (2017). "Ensayos monetarios para economías Abiertas. El caso argentino" [Monetary Essays for Open Economies: The Argentine Case]. Revista Actualidad Económica (in Spanish). National University of Córdoba, Faculty of Economic Sciences, Institute of Economics and Finance (91): 5–24.


== Notes ==


== Citations ==


== Further reading ==


=== Books ===


=== Journal articles ===


== External links ==

 Spanish Wikiquote has quotations related to: Javier Milei

Javier Milei's channel on YouTube
Javier Milei's Government Plan Unveiled (in English)
Bases de acción política y plataform electoral nacionale 2023 (in Spanish)
Biography by CIDOB (in Spanish)