killers of the flower moon is a 2023 american epic western crime drama film directed and produced by martin scorsese, who co-wrote the script with eric roth based on the 2017 non-fiction book by david grann. set in 1920s oklahoma, it focuses on a series of murders of osage members and relations in the osage nation after oil was discovered on tribal land. the tribal members had retained mineral rights on their reservation, but a corrupt local political boss sought to steal the tribal members' wealth.leonardo dicaprio, robert de niro and lily gladstone lead an ensemble cast, also including jesse plemons, tantoo cardinal, john lithgow and brendan fraser. it is the sixth feature film collaboration between scorsese and dicaprio, the tenth between scorsese and de niro, and the eleventh and final collaboration between scorsese and composer robbie robertson, who died two months prior to the film's release. the film is dedicated to robertson.development began in march 2016 when imperative entertainment won the adaptation rights to the book. scorsese and dicaprio were attached to the film in 2017, with production expected to begin in early 2018. following several pushbacks and delays due to the covid-19 pandemic, production was scheduled to begin in february 2021, with apple tv+ confirmed to finance and distribute the film alongside paramount pictures. principal photography ultimately took place between april and october 2021, in osage and washington counties, oklahoma. the film was produced by scorsese's sikelia productions and dicaprio's appian way productions, with its $200 million budget reportedly the largest amount ever spent on a film shoot in oklahoma.killers of the flower moon premiered at the 76th cannes film festival on may 20, 2023. it was theatrically released in the united states on october 20, 2023, by apple tv+ under their apple original films label, alongside paramount pictures. it was additionally screened in imax. the film has grossed over $156 million worldwide and received critical acclaim, with scorsese's direction, the screenplay, production values, editing, cinematography, musical score, and cast performances (especially dicaprio, gladstone, and de niro) being praised, although the runtime received criticism. it won best film at the national board of review and was named one of the top 10 films of 2023 by the american film institute. it has also been nominated for seven golden globe awards, including best motion picture – drama.


== plot ==
osage nation elders bury a ceremonial pipe, mourning their descendants' assimilation into white anglo-saxon protestant american society. wandering through their oklahoma reservation, which features the annual "flower moon" phenomenon of fields of blooms, several osage find oil gushing from the ground. the tribe becomes wealthy, as it retains mineral rights and members share in oil-lease revenues, though law requires white court-appointed legal guardians to manage the money of full and half-blood members, assuming them "incompetent".in 1919, ernest burkhart returns from world war i to live with his brother byron and uncle william king hale on hale's large reservation ranch. hale, a reserve deputy sheriff/cattle rancher popularly called "king", poses as a friendly benefactor of the osage, speaking their language and bestowing gifts. he suggests that ernest court mollie kyle, an osage whose family owns oil headrights. ernest, who alongside byron has been committing armed robbery against the osage, meets mollie via his day job as a cab driver. a romance develops, and the two marry in a ceremony mixing roman catholic and osage traditions. over time, they raise three children.
hale secretly orders the contract killings of multiple wealthy osage. he explains that ernest will inherit more headrights if more of mollie's family dies. mollie is diabetic, and her mother lizzie is ill. after mollie's sister minnie dies of a mysterious illness, hale orders byron to kill mollie's other sister, the rebellious anna. lizzie and the osage council blame the reservation's white residents and urge the tribe to fight back.
a newsreel of the 1921 tulsa race massacre, in which white people destroyed a black community and killed numerous residents, causes further concern amongst the osage that they could suffer similarly. lizzie sees her ancestors welcome her to the afterlife as she dies. hale orders ernest to murder henry roan, mollie's first husband, to collect on his life insurance. however, ernest botches the assassination and hale brutally paddles him inside a masonic temple as punishment.
hale is the local political boss, and both the local sheriff and judges are in his pocket; so no investigations are made. an osage nation representative seeking to lobby congress is murdered in washington, d.c. mollie discreetly hires private detective william j. burns, but ernest and byron beat him and run him off of the reservation.
hale orders ernest to murder reta, mollie's last remaining sister, and her husband by having criminal acie kirby blow up her house. mollie inherits all her family's headrights. despite her illness, mollie travels to washington with an osage delegation and asks president calvin coolidge for help. because of this, hale orders ernest to poison mollie's insulin with heroin to "slow her down". mollie's condition worsens, and ernest sometimes uses the heroin himself from shame. 
due to mollie's lobbying, the bureau of investigation (boi) sends agent thomas bruce white sr. and assistants to investigate; they quickly find out the truth. hale tries to cover his tracks by whacking his own hitmen, including acie, but special agent white arrests hale and ernest. the agents find mollie severely ill and get her proper medical care.
special agent white persuades ernest burckhardt to confess and turn state's evidence against his uncle. w. s. hamilton, hale's attorney, tries to convince ernest to claim he was tortured and recant. however, after one of his and mollie's daughters dies of whooping cough, ernest testifies against his uncle. hale unsuccessfully tries to have his nephew murdered. mollie meets with ernest after he testifies, but decides to leave him after he refuses to admit to poisoning her.
a radio show later reveals the aftermath. ernest burckhardt and william hale were convicted and both received life sentences. both were paroled after years of incarceration, despite osage protests to the parole board. byron served no prison time due to a hung jury. the shoun brothers, who gave ernest the heroin for mollie and were implicated in other "wasting deaths", were never prosecuted due to lack of evidence. after the trial, mollie divorced ernest, married john cobb, and died of diabetes in 1937 at the age of 50. she was buried with her parents, sisters and daughter. her obituary did not mention the osage murders. a 21st century osage powwow with a large dancing circle is later shown.


== cast ==


== themes ==
the analysis of the themes in the book and film has centered on the difference between killers of the flower moon and traditional westerns in the old hollywood tradition. in its review of the film, jorge cotte of the nation stated: "unlike the visions of unbounded freedom found in traditional westerns, martin scorsese's new film is a study of a west bounded by the vertical geometry of oil rigs and the violent conspiracies of powerful men." cotte then indicated the thematic differences between the book version and the film version of scorsese's film stating: "at the center of grann's book is a set of unsolved crimes: a slew of unsolved murders, then called the 'reign of terror', that tormented the osage from 1921 to 1926, and the corresponding emergence of a bureau of investigation (the eventual fbi) that finally arrives to determine who is doing the murdering. the book is meticulously researched and as diligent in setting the context for these shocking acts as it is in examining j. edgar hoover's role in shaping the bureau and using the murders as a showcase for it... scorsese's retelling ends up being narrower in focus. it does away with much of the original's sense of suspense and hoover's role in the investigation, and instead focuses on how an individual descends, through greed, complicity, and cowardice, into unforgivable acts of despoliation and violence."


== production ==


=== development ===

on march 10, 2016, imperative entertainment won the bidding war to make a film adaptation of david grann's nonfiction book killers of the flower moon and paid $5 million; the studio's dan friedkin and bradley thomas would produce the film. in april 2017, it was revealed that martin scorsese, leonardo dicaprio, and robert de niro were considering involvement in the film, adapted by eric roth. both de niro and dicaprio had long histories of working with scorsese, but the three had collaborated only once before in the 2015 short film the audition. in july 2017, production designer dante ferretti revealed that filming would begin in early 2018, with scorsese directing and dicaprio starring. however, production stalled until october 2018, when it was announced that the film would be scorsese's next effort after completing the irishman (2019). at that point, filming was due to begin in summer 2019.


=== pre-production ===
in june 2019, it was announced that paramount pictures would distribute the film. on july 26, 2019, scorsese traveled to the osage nation in pawhuska, oklahoma, to meet with principal chief geoffrey standing bear to discuss how the osage nation could be involved with the film's production. days later, it was reported that de niro had joined the cast, with filming tentatively set to commence in the summer of 2020.in december 2019, rodrigo prieto, scorsese's frequent cinematographer since the wolf of wall street (2013), confirmed that the film was expected to start principal photography in march 2020, adding that the "look and feel of the film" was still being figured out. at the 26th screen actors guild awards on january 19, 2020, dicaprio confirmed that he and de niro would star in the film. dicaprio was paid $30 million for his involvement. in april 2020, it was announced that the filming of killers of the flower moon had been postponed indefinitely in response to the covid-19 pandemic. meanwhile, scorsese had reached out to netflix and apple tv+ to finance and distribute the film, as paramount had concerns about the film's budget reaching $200 million. paramount was still open to a deal to be involved with the film alongside an additional partner. in may 2020, apple tv+ was announced to co-finance and co-distribute the film, with paramount remaining as distributor.in february 2021, lily gladstone and jesse plemons were added to the cast. though the role of thomas white, the lead boi agent, was initially written for dicaprio, dicaprio pushed to instead portray a nephew of the film's primary antagonist played by de niro. as a result, jesse plemons was cast as white to replace dicaprio, while dicaprio was cast as ernest burkhart. in march, tantoo cardinal, cara jade myers, janae collins and jillian dion were added to the cast. william belleau, louis cancelmi, jason isbell, sturgill simpson, tatanka means, michael abbott jr., pat healy, and scott shepherd joined in april.in april 2021, jack fisk signed on as production designer for the film, marking the first collaboration between the oscar nominee and martin scorsese. in june, steve eastin, gary basaraba and barry corbin joined the cast. in august 2021, it was announced that brendan fraser and john lithgow had been added to the cast.


=== filming ===
killers of the flower moon was expected to begin production in february 2021 in oklahoma. principal photography ultimately began on april 19, 2021, with filming taking place in osage county and washington county, namely pawhuska, fairfax and bartlesville.in a news release before the beginning of filming, scorsese said: "we are thrilled to finally start production on killers of the flower moon in oklahoma. to be able to tell this story on the land where these events took place is incredibly important and critical to allowing us to portray an accurate depiction of the time and people. we're grateful to apple, the oklahoma film and music office and the osage nation, especially all our osage consultants and cultural advisors, as we prepare for this shoot. we're excited to start working with our local cast and crew to bring this story to life on screen and immortalize a time in american history that should not be forgotten."on may 13, de niro suffered a quadriceps muscle injury off-set and returned to new york city for medical attention; production was not delayed, as de niro's subsequent scenes would be filmed in june 2021. filming wrapped on october 1, 2021. on march 25, 2022, osage nation principal chief geoffrey standing bear told the tulsa press club "he was advised killers of the flower moon is tentatively slated to film additional scenes of a traditional community dance in mid-may in osage county."in january 2023, gladstone said that the input of the osage nation greatly changed the film from what scorsese had originally envisioned and that their collaboration had positively affected the film, stating in an interview at the 2023 sundance film festival that "the work is better when you let the world inform your work".


=== post-production ===
industrial light & magic and visual effects supervisor pablo helman provided the visual effects for the film after previously collaborating with scorsese on the irishman and silence.


== music ==

frequent scorsese collaborator robbie robertson, himself having cayuga and mohawk ancestry, composed the incidental score. critics have described it as "old-timey", "bluesy", and "percussive". the film also features a soundtrack of popular music from the 1920s and native american songs. it was robertson's final completed film score before he died in august 2023. the film is dedicated to his memory.


== release ==
killers of the flower moon had its world premiere at the 76th cannes film festival on may 20, 2023, where the film received a nine-minute standing ovation at the end of its screening. the film's united states premiere took place on september 27, 2023, at alice tully hall at lincoln center in new york city, with none of the cast members in attendance due to the 2023 sag-aftra strike. the film was originally set to open in select theaters on october 6, 2023, before going wide in the united states on october 20, 2023, by apple tv+ (under their apple original films label) and paramount pictures. however, the limited release was later scrapped, with the film receiving a global theatrical rollout on october 20.as reported by variety, italy's rai cinema, alongside leone film group, has acquired the rights for local theatrical release over paramount as they managed to secure the rights in the middle of the film's production progress. right before the film's second trailer premiered in july 2023, it was announced that the film would also be released in imax theatres.a small number of cinemas in denmark, germany, italy, portugal, brazil, the netherlands and the united states inserted their own intermission into the film. the theaters were considered to be in violation of their contract by paramount and apple original films, who took action to have it stopped. the film has been criticized for its long running time, which scorsese and editor thelma schoonmaker have publicly defended. the film was released on video on demand (vod) platforms on december 5, 2023.


== reception ==


=== box office ===
as of december 19, 2023, killers of the flower moon has grossed $67.2 million in the united states and canada, and $89 million in other territories, for a worldwide total of $156.2 million. variety noted that under a traditional theatrical release, the film would need to gross $500–600 million worldwide in order to break-even.in the united states and canada, the film was projected to gross $20–25 million from 3,621 theaters in its opening weekend. the film made $9.4 million on its first day, including $2.6 million from thursday night previews. it went on to debut to $23 million. the total was above the average scorsese–dicaprio collaboration ($19 million), the highest opening of scorsese–de niro collaborations (topping cape fear's $10.2 million in 1991), and the third-best of scorsese's career; 61% of the audience was male, with "an amazing" 38% being over 45 years old. the film made $9 million in its second weekend (a drop of 61%), then $7 million in its third, finishing in third place both times.


=== critical response ===
on the review aggregator website rotten tomatoes, 93% of 435 critics' reviews are positive, with an average rating of 8.5/10. the website's consensus reads: "enormous in runtime, theme, and achievement, killers of the flower moon is a sobering appraisal of america's relationship with indigenous peoples and yet another artistic zenith for martin scorsese and his collaborators." metacritic, which uses a weighted average, assigned the film a score of 89 out of 100, based on 63 critics, indicating "universal acclaim". audiences polled by cinemascore gave the film an average grade of "a−" on an a+ to f scale, while those polled by posttrak gave it an 88% overall positive score, with 72% saying they would definitely recommend the film.in his review of the "meaty and demanding" film following its premiere at cannes, peter debruge of variety commended the story, characters and themes, but criticized the runtime: "in its present form, [killers of the flower moon] is still a compelling true story ... it's engrossing from the get-go, the palpable tension methodically echoed by robbie robertson's steady-heartbeat score. but it keeps going and going until everyone we care about is dead, dying or behind bars, with nearly an hour still in store". conversely, david rooney of the hollywood reporter opined, "the three-and-a-half-hour running time is fully justified in an escalating tragedy that never loosens its grip" and praised the screenplay, direction, cinematography, score, and cast performances (particularly that of gladstone).in the guardian, peter bradshaw called the film an "epic of creeping, existential horror about the birth of the american century, a macabre tale of quasi-genocidal serial killings" and also lauded the "performance of tragic force" by gladstone. the los angeles times' justin chang observed that the film "is both like and unlike anything its director has ever done", writing "scorsese doesn't just achieve a sense of place; he also pulls off, not for the first time, a passionate and meticulous feat of cultural anthropology. he brings an entire bygone era to rich, teeming life, just before he chokes it off with an all-consuming stench of death."the film's coda in particular drew acclaim for its acknowledgement of the historical silencing of crimes committed against indigenous peoples, with joel robinson of slate writing the scene "turns the camera both inward and onto the audience simultaneously", and the new yorker's richard brody noting, "scorsese's control of form and tone, and the bold yet subtle way that he marshals incident, signal that he is intent not merely on narrating history but on troubling the conscience of his (doubtless largely white) audience".much praise was given to lily gladstone's performance, with anthony lane of the new yorker describing her as "unmistakably the movie's most compelling presence", and justin chang calling her "an actor who can set off more emotional reverberations with a barely cracked smile than some performers manage in an entire monologue". richard brody observed, "[mollie] is not only the character on whose actions the drama pivots but also the one whose subjectivity, presented sparingly but suggested powerfully, gives the story a sense of inner life."some critics lamented the film's decision to focus its narrative on the characters of ernest and hale, opining that the character of mollie felt underdeveloped. chang noted "the movie seems curiously reluctant to penetrate the psychology of its osage characters — a reluctance that feels like timidity, respect or maybe a mix of both." angelica jade bastién of vulture wrote, "trapped by the gleam of reverence, [scorsese] ends up returning to the same racial stereotypes he sought to avoid: the osage people are noble and connected to the land, but their personalities, their desires, their joys, and, most crucially, their anger remain in the shadowed hallways of a history scorsese is too timid to approach."


=== accolades ===


=== indigenous response ===
at the film's la premiere, christopher cote, an osage who was a language consultant for the film, said that he "really wanted this to be from the perspective of mollie and what her family experienced". slate's joel robinson, an osage, expressed similar views, but still praised the film, concurring with former chief of the osage nation jim gray that he had "never seen a film immerse itself in a culture like this one did with ours." he added that he hoped that the success of the film would mean more opportunities for indigenous filmmakers to tell stories from their own point of view. maureen lee lenker notes in entertainment weekly that first nations actress devery jacobs, elora danan postoak on reservation dogs, shared her reaction to the film: "being native, watching this movie was f---ing [sic] hellfire. ... our pride[,] languages, cultures, joy & love are way more interesting & humanizing than showing the horrors white men inflicted on us."; jacobs also believes gladstone "carried mollie [with] tremendous grace", and that though no performances were weak, "each of the osage characters felt painfully underwritten, while the white men were given way more courtesy and depth.'" indigenous commentator kate nelson wrote, "when it comes to native representation, is killers of the flower moon perfect? no. is it progress? yes. the film meaningfully moves the entertainment industry forward, making a strong statement that it's no longer acceptable to extract valuable assets from indigenous communities – whether that be our stories or our natural resources – without our consent and input."on november 9, 2023, the day that the sag-aftra strike ended, gladstone posted on social media encouraging native people to "see it when and only if you feel ready, and see it with people you feel safe with. you'll likely have a lot of generational grief to process."


=== legislative responses ===
lieutenant governor of oklahoma matt pinnell named the film as a reason to increase subsidies for the film industry in oklahoma. the filmed in oklahoma act of 2021 allocated $30 million to film subsidies. bills to increase the total available subsidies to $80 million in 2023 failed in the oklahoma senate after passing the oklahoma house of representatives.


== see also ==
the fbi story
tragedies of the osage hills
the honeymoon killers, a 1970 film scorsese was to direct and whose title the title may be alluded to


== notes ==


== references ==


== external links ==
killers of the flower moon at imdb
killers of the flower moon at rotten tomatoes 
official website